---
layout: blogpost.html
title: What we can do to make MRIs less stressful
descriptions: Personal reflections and suggestions for MRIs
---

<nav id="left-comment">

1. [Basic suggestions](#basic-suggestions)
2. [The second scan I got](#the-second-scan-i-got)
3. [Broader context](#broader-context)
4. [Bibliography](#bibliography)
5. [Footnotes](#footnotes)

</nav>

<article id="main-content">

# What we can do to make MRIs less stressful

I have some ideas, from a layman’s perspective, on how to make MRIs less
stressful for patients. I had two MRIs taken this year, and the way they
were administered, and how that differed between the two clinics, made
me reflect on *why* they’re stressful. I’m pretty sure that many
stressful aspects *don’t have to be that way*. So I’m writing this to
fix & publish some naïve ideas for what could be done better.

Importantly, **these are rough ideas**, and not demands. **I’m not a
doctor**, and I haven’t done any research on how MRIs work or how
they’re administered. For all I know, all of these ideas could be
ridiculous and harmful, entirely impractical, or already well-known.

---

<h2 class="background-heading" id="basic-suggestions"> Basic suggestions </h2>

The first MRI I got was for a study on [magnetic resonance
elastography](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Magnetic_resonance_elastography),
where an MRI of my liver was compared with the results from a previous
liver biopsy. Liver biopsies are *not fun*, and I very much hope MRE can
replace it.

This was a very relaxed affair. I had lots of time to ask questions
beforehand. For instance: Not only did I get a “stress ball” to
communicate that I was uncomfortable and wanted the MRI to stop, but I
also got to *test that* beforehand to convince me it did in fact work.

Openness and taking your time for each patient is generally important.
Here, seeing the stress ball work let me have more intuitive trust that
this unfamiliar setting would help me.

_Suggestion 0. A general caring attitude, being open to the patient’s
questions, and taking your time, are needed._

Knowing that everything’s working correctly is also important for the
machine itself. Since I’m alone when the MRI is running, and I don’t
know anything about MRIs, I need to judge for myself if the machine is
working correctly. The machine is big and heavy, and unfamiliar, so if I
have the faintest suspicion something’s not working properly, it makes
me nervous.

Unfortunately that is an area where I didn’t get much reassurance. I
didn’t know what sounds I should expect. It doesn’t help that MRI sounds
are usually in my view inaccurately described as “knocking” or “very
loud”. I also didn’t know how long everything went precisely. When the
machine pauses, I can’t tell if we’re at the end, or if something’s gone
wrong, or if this is just a regular pause.

I actually made use of the stress ball once. That was because I felt a
repeated strange senation in one part of my body. They couldn’t tell
what it was either, and it was probably harmless, so we continued
afterwards. In general, even though MRI is non-invasive, you do feel
some strange things. I don’t know if these are actually the result of
the magnetic field, or just because the device is vibrating, but it’s an
interesting sensation, and I think it should be stated upfront.

_Suggestion 1. I should be given an understanding of what I should
expect. First, I need to be given a sample of the sounds I should
expect. Ideally every kind of sound that will happen. Secondly, I want
to know what passes the MRI does, and why it changes its sound patterns,
and how long they’ll be._

This also applies massively to my position in the machine. I had my head
near the end of the tube and could look out the back, and in my second
MRI the head was fully outside of the tube, but it’s still unexpected
just how cramped it feels in there. This is especially the case because
the bed you lie on rises so far up before going into the tube that the
space in the tube is basically cut in half. When I first looked at it, I
thought there was plenty of space, because I was imagining myself lying
in the bottom of the tube. I think I should be given more opportunities
to familiarise myself with the space. For instance, you could be shown
how high the bed goes, or be moved into the MRI for a short moment and
taken back out.

_Suggestion 1½: Give me an understanding of how tight the space will be
by demonstrating it or showing how the bed is positioned inside the
machine._

In this MRI, I got noise-cancelling headphones that the test taker could
communicate via. There were also pre-recorded voices that instructed me
to hold my breath for some phases of the scan.

This had two important effects: I got a feeling of being connected to
the outside world, even being able to ask questions when the headphones
were connected, and I got reassured that everything was working
correctly and moving along when I got instructions.

_Suggestion 2. During the test, I should be given updates on how the test
is going. Ideally I should also be told how long it will probably take,
or how much of it is already done._

I think the messages were under-utilised. They could’ve been used to
inform me of the specific sound patterns I should expect, such as by
playing a sample, and why they would happen, by explaining the specific
scan passes.

---

<h2 class="background-heading" id="the-second-scan-i-got"> The second scan I got </h2>

The second MRI I got was a lot more rushed. It was at a clinic that
specialises in imaging people, and they clearly process a lot of people
and operate on a tight schedule. I had to rush in my question about
whether my head would be inside or outside the tube while I was being
moved into it. I also didn’t get any voice updated through the
noise-cancelling headphones.

This wasn’t as big a deal, as I was already somewhat familiar with MRI,
now. Since I was asked if I had an MRI taken of me before, and I told
them, I hope they are a bit more accomodating with those that take their
first MRI at this clinic. But since the MRI wasn’t exactly the same, I
still had some questions, and I still felt uncomfortable because of this
unwillingness to take questions.

However, one thing I do applaud them for is giving me access to the MRI
scan in a web-based viewer. I could even download the scan as a file. I
think this is very neat, though I understand not everyone will take
advantage of it. It also seems like this isn’t done for transparency or
the curious patient, but so that the referring doctor can view the scan
in this tool. It’s just also coincidentally available to the patient.

---

<h2 class="background-heading" id="broader-context"> Broader context </h2>

I said in the opening that I haven’t done any research—that’s a bit of a
lie. I did search once for “MRI stress” (or something), and I found an
article about how to cope with MRI, and a paper that discussed the
issue. I didn’t read either—I was just trying to confirm my assumption
that MRIs were commonly seen as stressful. Before, the best evidence I
had of that was that my mother warned me intently about the MRI before I
got it. My mother is claustrophobic, and I believed I wouldn’t have as
much of an issue with it as she seemed to have had. I still had more
stress than I expected.

But I did read a bit of the abstract of the paper I found (Madl et al.
2022, [see bibliography entry 1](#bib-1)). It says <q>*Despite being noninvasive and
painless*, MRI is recurrently associated with stress and anxiety in
patients.</q> (emphasis added). <sup><a href="#footnote-1" id="footnote-1-ref-1">Footnote 1</a></sup>

I think this sentence is arrogant and disregards the patients. Even
though the article is about how to accomodate patients more, it still
carries the assumption that our fears are unfounded—we fear “despite”
MRI being safe. The patient can’t know that as well as the study authors
do. And e.g. considering what you *would* do if the machine
malfunctioned, and how you can tell if it does, is still a rational
thought, that nonetheless induces stress.

It also says “painless”. But I did experience unusual sensations when
inside. Not only did I experience the psychological stress of being
confined in a tight space and isolated from other people while loud
noises came from a huge machine close to my body, but I also experienced
physical sensations. If I read “painless”, what I imagine is something
like an infrared thermometer, or a fingertip pulse oximeter.

While these were harmless here, I was explicitly informed that it’s
possible some metal objects a patient might have could vibrate or heat
up during the procedure, which is why you have to tell the staff about
those. I have braces, and while I was told that it probably wasn’t a
problem at the first MRI, I was told an equivalent of “whatever, if it
heats up you’ll push the stress ball and we’ll figure it out” from staff
at the second MRI.

All of this is, in my view, part of a broader pattern of discounting the
patients’ experience when doing medicine. As another example, when I got
the biopsy I mentioned earlier, I wasn’t informed that I’d be cut with a
scalpel. That was a really stressful moment, since I have a light fear
of knives. When I saw the scalpel I recoiled instinctively and was
effectively pressured to “get over”, so to say, my fear, in the moment.
This sort of thing probably happens routinely in the medical system. And
publishing studies on how it should be done better won’t fix it on its
own. (Neither will this article.)

## Bibliography

<ol id="bib">

<li id="bib-1">

The abstract of Madl, J., Janka, R., Bay, S., & Rohleder, N.
(2022). MRI as a Stressor: The Psychological and Physiological Response
of Patients to MRI, Influencing Factors, and Consequences. *Journal of
the American College of Radiology : JACR*, *19*(3), 423–432.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jacr.2021.11.020

</li>

</ol>

<hr>

<aside id="footnotes">
<ol>

<h2> Footnotes </h2>

<li id="footnote-1">

Notice that I did not elide the period at the end of that quote,
and if I hadn’t added the parenthetical, I wouldn’t have done that
either. I would’ve had two periods with a closing quote mark in
between. Style guides that suggest that one should write “She said
‘The door was already open.’” or “He asked ‘Did they see you?’”
are absolutely fucking stupid and have to stop right now. Also if
you end a sentence with “etc.” there have to be two periods at the
end. [Go back to text](#footnote-1-ref-1)

</li>

</ol>
</aside>

</article>
